Genius though he was, Leonardo da Vinci didn't produce man y paintings because he was a perfectionist
and spent years on each one. Only seventeen of them survive, and they are all very valuable. Leonardo began
painting the Mona Lisa in 1503 and finished it shortly before his death in 1519. Today many consider it the
most famous painting in the world, and one of the most precious, but this hasn't always been the case.
The Mona Lisa didn't become well-known until the Symbolist movement in the mid-nineteenth century,
when it was viewed as the embodiment of eternal femininity. The painting's fame skyrocketed in the twentieth
century, when it was stolen from the Louvre in 1911. The theft closed the museum down for a week. Pablo
Picasso was one of the suspects, but it turned out the painting had been taken by a Louvre employee, Vincenzo
Peruggia, who was apprehended two years later when he tried to sell it to the Ufizzi Gallery in Florence.
Perhaps the most important element of the painting is the gaze: it meets ours, while Mon a Lisa's posture
and the visual impression of distance between sitter and observer that Leonardo created give her an almost
divine inaccessibility.

Mona Lisa is a realistic woman and an ideal at the same time, full of contradictions. Dynamism, and a sense
of movement, are always hailed as hallmarks of a masterpiece, and Leonardo succeeds in capturing dynamism
in motion, rather than someone holding a halt smile. Complex paintings evoke complex responses - there are
no easy analyses or interpretations. The painting continuously toys with our perceptions and emotions.
Speculations about the identity of the sitter also contribute to the painting's fame, until 2005 when a
library expert at the University of Heindelberg discovered a 1503 margin note written by Agostini Vespucci.
The sitter is now confirmed as Lisa del Giocondo, the wife of Francesco del Giocondo, a wealthy Florentine
silk merchant. The painting was commissioned to celebrate the birth of their second child. Detailed analysis of
the painting has shown that she is wearing a typical garment, worn by women while pregnant or after giving
birth. Before then there had been much speculation about the woman's identity, including the suggestion that
the painting was meant as an ironic self-portrait.
Above all, it is the enigmatic smile that continues to hold the public imagination in both popular culture
and the art world. It is a smile that seems to disappear when you look at it directly and Leonardo painted it with
this intention. Professor Margaret Livingstone at Harvard University explains that "her smile is almost entirely
187 in low special frequencies, and so is best seen by your peripheral vision," and says that artists like Leonardo
"discovered fundamental truths that scientists are only now unraveling." 
